

===== PAGE 1 =====

Domain-grounded LLM agents for reliable
orchestration of physics-constrained scientific
workflows
Rongbo Shao1, Guangzhi liao1, Xingcai Zhang2, Jun Zhou3,
Juan Zhang3, Xianzhi Song1, Lizhi Xiao1∗
1State Key Laboratory of Petroleum Resources and Engineering, China University of Petroleum, Beijing, China
2Department of Chemical and Nano Engineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA
3China National Logging Corporation, Shaanxi, China
∗Corresponding author. Email: xiaolizhi@cup.edu.cn
Scientific workflows in data-intensive domains require more than accurate
prediction models: they require sequential decision-making, heterogeneous tool
coordination, physical-constraint checking, exception handling and reproducible
reporting. Existing machine-learning systems usually automate isolated subtasks,
leaving the orchestration of complete scientific workflows to human experts.
Here we introduce Auto-Logging, a domain-grounded large-language-model agent
framework for autonomous orchestration of physics-constrained scientific work-
flows, demonstrated in subsurface well-log interpretation. Auto-Logging separates
workflow-level reasoning from numerical computation through a dual-agent ar-
chitecture. A Planner agent interprets user intent, retrieves domain procedures
and physical rules from a structured petrophysical knowledge base, and constructs
task plans with explicit dependencies. An Executor agent grounds these plans by
invoking specialized numerical models and preprocessing tools through stan-
1

===== PAGE 2 =====

dardized interfaces, returning structured feedback that enables dynamic work-
flow revision, exception handling and traceable report generation. We evaluate
Auto-Logging on forward-simulated data and real well-log data from the SPWLA
dataset, covering data quality control, missing-curve imputation, lithology clas-
sification, reservoir-parameter prediction, fluid identification and report gener-
ation. Compared with expert-assisted conventional interpretation, Auto-Logging
reduces end-to-end interpretation time from hours to minutes, substantially de-
creases manual intervention, and improves run-to-run consistency while main-
taining competitive or superior prediction accuracy for key reservoir parame-
ters. Compared with strong task-specific AI baselines, the framework uniquely
supports full end-to-end automation and dynamic multi-task coordination. Abla-
tion experiments show that retrieval-augmented domain grounding, LLM-based
scheduling and structured feedback loops each contribute to workflow reliability.
These results establish a practical architecture for building scientific AI systems in
which language models coordinate specialized computational components under
explicit domain constraints. More broadly, Auto-Logging suggests a route toward
reproducible, adaptive and human-auditable scientific workflow automation in
engineering and data-intensive science.
1 Introduction
Complex scientific workflows increasingly combine high-dimensional data, specialized computa-
tional models, domain rules, physical constraints and iterative human decisions. Deep learning and
foundation models have transformed single-task prediction across science and engineering, includ-
ing protein structure prediction, materials discovery, large-scale drug discovery, medical-image
segmentation, rare-disease model development, antimicrobial-peptide discovery and subcellular
phenotype analysis (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8). At the same time, AI-accelerated discovery and machine-
learning scientific systems are beginning to reshape climate prediction, engineering design and
computational science more broadly (9, 10). However, the organization of complete scientific
workflows remains heavily manual. Experts must decide which data-quality checks to run, which
2

===== PAGE 3 =====

models to invoke, how to respond to abnormal outputs, when to apply physical constraints and
how to assemble results into reproducible reports. This gap between model-level automation and
workflow-level autonomy limits scalability, consistency and rapid response in data-intensive scien-
tific practice.
Recent progress also shows that AI and machine learning are no longer limited to conventional
data classification; they are increasingly used to connect sensing, materials, biological and biomed-
ical systems into data-driven discovery pipelines. Examples include learning-guided bioresource
upgrading for sustainable energy, environment and biomedicine, AI-powered materials science,
AI-enabled nanomedicine, and machine-learning microfluidic monitoring of microorganisms at
minute-scale resolution (11, 12, 13, 14). These advances highlight both the breadth of AI-enabled
scientific automation and the remaining need for reliable workflow-level systems that can coordinate
data acquisition, model selection, physical or biological validation, exception handling and expert
review.
Subsurface well-log interpretation provides a rigorous testbed for this broader problem. A com-
plete interpretation workflow integrates in situ logging curves, geological context, petrophysical
theory and engineering judgement to infer lithology, porosity, water saturation, shale volume and
fluid type (15, 16, 17, 18). The workflow is sequential and strongly constrained: depth alignment
and curve-quality verification must precede modeling; lithology constrains reservoir-parameter es-
timation; and reservoir parameters and resistivity jointly inform fluid interpretation. Errors in early
stages propagate to downstream decisions, while anomalies such as missing curves, outliers, tool
failures and physically implausible predictions require adaptive intervention. These characteris-
tics make well-log interpretation an ideal domain for testing whether language-model agents can
coordinate scientific workflows under explicit physical and procedural constraints.
Existing machine-learning approaches for well-log interpretation usually target isolated sub-
tasks, such as lithology classification, missing-curve reconstruction or reservoir-parameter predic-
tion (17,18,19,20). Similar model-centric automation has expanded rapidly in microfluidic sensing,
virus detection, terahertz single-cell analysis, wearable monitoring and optical neural-computing
platforms, where AI improves individual measurement or prediction stages but often still requires
external workflow coordination (21,22,23,24,25,26,27). These models can be accurate within their
task boundary, but they do not determine the correct sequence of operations, validate intermediate
3

===== PAGE 4 =====

outputs against physical rules, recover from tool failures or generate auditable end-to-end inter-
pretation reports. General-purpose agent frameworks can call tools and decompose tasks, but they
are not designed around petrophysical dependencies, mandatory data checks, physical plausibility
constraints or field-deployment reliability (28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34). A scientific workflow agent
must therefore combine language-based planning with domain grounding, structured execution and
numerical models whose outputs remain traceable and verifiable.
Here we introduce Auto-Logging, a domain-grounded LLM-agent framework for reliable or-
chestration of physics-constrained scientific workflows. Auto-Logging uses a dual-agent archi-
tecture. A Planner agent performs intent understanding, retrieves petrophysical procedures and
physical constraints through retrieval-augmented generation, and builds dependency-aware work-
flows (35,36). An Executor agent converts plans into structured tool and model invocations, manages
data exchange through standardized interfaces, and returns execution summaries that enable adap-
tive revision (28, 29). The language model is not used as an unconstrained predictor; instead, it
functions as an auditable workflow-level controller that coordinates specialized numerical compo-
nents under domain rules.
This work makes four contributions. First, it introduces a Planner-Executor architecture that sep-
arates high-level scientific workflow planning from low-level numerical execution. Second, it shows
how retrieval-augmented domain knowledge and physical constraints can make LLM planning more
reliable in a specialized scientific setting. Third, it implements a closed-loop planning-execution-
feedback mechanism that adapts workflows when data quality, model accuracy or tool execution
fails. Fourth, it validates the framework on both forward-simulated and real well-log datasets, com-
paring it with expert-assisted interpretation, task-specific AI baselines and ablated system variants.
Together, these results demonstrate a practical pathway for building scientific AI systems that are
adaptive, reproducible and human-auditable (37, 38).
4

===== PAGE 5 =====

2 Results
2.1 A dual-agent architecture for domain-grounded workflow control
Auto-Logging transforms well-log interpretation from a fixed expert-operated pipeline into a
knowledge-grounded agentic workflow, as illustrated in Fig 1. The system has two interacting
agents. The Planner receives natural-language interpretation requests, retrieves relevant petrophys-
ical rules and constructs a structured execution plan. The Executor converts this plan into model
and tool invocations and returns structured results, quality indicators and exception signals. The
separation of planning and execution makes each step inspectable: the reasoning-level decision,
the numerical model invoked, the input-output schema and the validation result can all be logged
independently (28, 29, 34, 39).
Figure 1: Overall architecture of Auto-Logging. The Planner uses retrieval-augmented domain
knowledge to produce dependency-aware interpretation workflows. The Executor grounds these
workflows by invoking preprocessing tools and specialized numerical models. Results are returned
to the Planner for physical validation, adaptive revision and report generation.
The architecture differs from monolithic prediction systems in two ways. First, no single neural
5

===== PAGE 6 =====

network is expected to solve the entire interpretation task. Instead, task-specific models are en-
capsulated as independently callable components, including missing-curve imputation, lithology
classification, reservoir-parameter prediction and fluid identification. Second, the LLM agent does
not directly infer petrophysical quantities. It coordinates the correct tools, checks whether their
outputs satisfy domain constraints and triggers recovery actions when outputs are incomplete,
inconsistent or physically implausible.
2.2 Retrieval-augmented planning under physical and procedural constraints
Reliable scientific workflow orchestration requires that the agent know not only what tools exist, but
also when they are scientifically appropriate. Auto-Logging therefore grounds the Planner through
a structured petrophysical knowledge base containing workflow rules, physical thresholds, curve-
response relationships, model requirements and report-generation constraints. During planning,
retrieved knowledge is used to enforce the order of operations, select models compatible with the
available curves, and define validation criteria for intermediate results (16, 17, 35).
For example, if a request asks for reservoir-parameter estimation from raw curves, the Planner
first inserts data-quality control and preprocessing steps before any prediction model is called. If
acoustic, neutron or resistivity curves have extended missing intervals, the workflow branches to
missing-curve imputation before lithology or parameter inference. If porosity, shale volume or water
saturation values exceed physically acceptable ranges, the Planner does not simply pass the result
downstream; it requests reprocessing, switches to a backup model or asks for expert verification
depending on the severity of the anomaly. This design shifts the role of the LLM from open-ended
text generation to constrained scientific control.
2.3 Closed-loop execution and adaptive exception handling
Auto-Logging advances through a closed planning-execution-feedback loop (Fig 2). The Planner
issues a structured task; the Executor converts it into a standardized command; the target tool or
model performs the computation; the result is stored and summarized; and the Executor returns
status, metrics and abnormal-condition flags to the Planner. The Planner then decides whether to
continue, revise the workflow or trigger expert intervention. This loop provides the main mechanism
6

===== PAGE 7 =====

Table 1: Conceptual comparison between Auto-Logging and common AI workflow paradigms.
Dimension Generic tool agents Task-specific AI
models
Auto-Logging
Primary role General tool
invocation and task
decomposition
Accurate prediction
for an isolated task
Domain-grounded
orchestration of
complete workflows
Domain constraints Usually optional or
prompt-level only
Embedded implicitly
in training data
Explicitly retrieved,
checked and logged
Workflow
dependencies
Weakly enforced Outside model scope Encoded as
mandatory step
dependencies
Exception handling Retry or stop Usually unavailable Tiered response:
retry, workflow
revision, backup
model or expert
review
Numerical prediction May rely on the LLM
or external tools
Performed by one
model
Performed by
specialized numerical
models; LLM only
coordinates
Traceability Variable Limited to model
output
Plan, command,
model result,
validation and report
are separately
traceable
7

===== PAGE 8 =====

for adaptive control in the presence of incomplete data, model uncertainty, interface timeouts or
physical inconsistency (38).
Figure 2: Dynamic adjustment and abnormal-alarm mechanism. The system iterates across Planner,
Executor and model/tool library. Structured result feedback allows the Planner to continue the
workflow after successful execution, revise the plan when moderate anomalies are detected or
trigger expert review when critical failures occur.
Exceptions are grouped into four categories: data-related anomalies, model- or tool-related
anomalies, communication anomalies and process-dependency conflicts. Minor failures, such as a
transient timeout, trigger automatic retry. Moderate failures, such as prediction accuracy below a
preset threshold or a violated physical bound, trigger workflow revision or backup-model selection.
Critical failures, such as unavailability of a core component or repeated physical inconsistency,
suspend autonomous execution and request human review. This tiered design is central to making
the system suitable for scientific and engineering use, where silent failure is less acceptable than
controlled escalation.
8

===== PAGE 9 =====

2.4 End-to-end interpretation workflow
The implemented workflow covers the main stages of well-log interpretation: data loading, quality
control, preprocessing, missing-curve imputation, lithology classification, reservoir-parameter pre-
diction, fluid identification, potential evaluation and report generation. Raw data are first checked
against physical validity ranges and curve-continuity requirements. Sporadic outliers are corrected
or clipped to valid bounds, while extended abnormal segments are marked for imputation. Bounded
curves are normalized to a fixed interval, and resistivity curves are log-transformed to reduce the
effect of multi-order magnitude variation (17, 18). The same principle of coupling AI with physi-
cally grounded measurement, transport or theranostic platforms has become increasingly important
across nanomedicine, immunotherapy, nature-inspired functional materials and wireless therapeutic
systems (40, 41, 42, 43).
Specialized numerical models then perform the core quantitative tasks. An LSTM-based model
reconstructs missing AC, CNL and RT curves using complete auxiliary curves (19). A 2D-CNN
identifies lithology from local depth windows and multiple logging responses (1). A multi-task
Bi-LSTM predicts shale volume, porosity and water saturation (15, 19, 44). Fluid type is inferred
from the combination of reservoir parameters and resistivity-related features. Finally, the Plan-
ner integrates results into a standardized report with explicit data provenance and interval-level
interpretation (Fig. 3).
2.5 Datasets and evaluation design
We evaluated Auto-Logging using two datasets with complementary purposes (Table 2). The
forward-simulated dataset was generated from petrophysical models to provide complete ground
truth for full-process validation, including lithology, fluid type and multiple log curves under
controlled noise. The real-world SPWLA competition dataset was used to test core task perfor-
mance under realistic logging conditions. The combination allows evaluation of both workflow
completeness and practical robustness.
Performance was assessed at three levels: workflow coordination, model prediction and system
reliability. Workflow metrics included task-decomposition accuracy, invocation success, process-
ing time, manual-intervention time and task completion rate. Prediction metrics included accuracy,
9

===== PAGE 10 =====

Table 2: Datasets used for evaluation.
Dataset Samples / wells Input curves Targets Primary purpose
Forward-
simulated
dataset
41,740 samples AC, CAL, CNL,
DEN, GR, RT,
RXO, SP
Lithology, fluid
type, Vsh,
porosity, water
saturation and
related
petrophysical
quantities
End-to-end
functional
validation,
ablation and
controlled error
analysis
SPWLA
competition
dataset
41,651 samples
from 10 wells
CAL, DEN, GR,
NEU, RMED,
RDEP
PHIF, SW and
VSH
Real-world
validation of
preprocessing
and reservoir-
parameter
prediction
precision, recall, F1 score, mean absolute error, mean squared error and coefficient of determi-
nation. Reliability analyses included ablations, manual-expert comparison, state-of-the-art model
comparison and qualitative error analysis.
2.6 System-level automation and efficiency
On the forward-simulated dataset, the Planner correctly decomposed representative user requests
into valid workflows and integrated approximately 1,500 interval-level data points into report-
ready outputs. The Executor achieved high model-invocation success and completed a single-well
interpretation in approximately 25 minutes. On the SPWLA dataset, the Planner generated a
complete workflow for a roughly 2,000-sample well in seconds, and the full interpretation finished
in approximately 10 minutes without manual intervention.
Deployment tests on a cloud environment showed stable operation under repeated execu-
tion(Table 3). Task planning required approximately 12-18 s, single-well interpretation required
approximately 15-30 min depending on data volume and available curves, and batch processing
10

===== PAGE 11 =====

of 10 wells scaled approximately linearly. A 48-hour continuous operation test achieved a task-
completion rate of 99.7%, and common input formats such as LAS, CSV and TXT were supported
with high loading success. These results indicate that the main advantage of Auto-Logging is not
only predictive accuracy but the ability to coordinate a complete, auditable workflow.
Table 3: System-level automation and efficiency metrics.
Metric Auto-Logging result Interpretation
Planner workflow generation 15.4±1.2 s on a
representative SPWLA well
Rapid construction of
dependency-aware workflows
Full SPWLA well
interpretation
10.2±1.3 min End-to-end execution without
manual intervention in the
tested case
Forward-simulated
single-well interpretation
25.3±2.1 min Full-process workflow
including reporting
Continuous operation task
completion
99.7% over 48 h Stable cloud-based execution
Manual intervention ˜1 min in benchmark
comparison
Substantially reduced
repetitive expert operation
2.7 Prediction performance on simulated and real data
On the forward-simulated dataset, missing-curve imputation reconstructed AC, CNL and RT curves
with strong agreement to the held-out ground truth. The best imputation performance was obtained
for CNL, while RT remained more difficult because of its high dynamic range and sensitivity to fluid
and borehole conditions. Lithology classification achieved high overall performance across four
lithology types, with particularly strong results for shale and fine sandstone. Multi-task reservoir-
parameter prediction produced high𝑅 2 values for shale volume, porosity and water saturation, and
fluid identification reached high accuracy across five fluid classes (Table 4).
On the SPWLA real-world dataset, preprocessing reduced the outlier ratio from 3.2% to 0.8%
and achieved a 99.1% curve-continuity compliance rate. Reservoir-parameter prediction applied
11

===== PAGE 12 =====

without task-specific retuning achieved𝑅 2 values above practical thresholds for VSH, PHIF and
SW. Rule-based fluid judgement using the predicted parameters achieved 91.3% accuracy in dis-
tinguishing oil layers, water layers and non-reservoir intervals, while reservoir-potential evaluation
reached 85.6% consistency with expert annotations.
Table 4: Summary of predictive performance.
Task Dataset Main result Comment
Missing-curve
imputation
Forward simulation CNL𝑅 2 = 0.9896±
0.003; AC𝑅 2 =
0.8992±0.012; RT
𝑅2 = 0.7906±0.018
RT is more difficult
because resistivity
varies over multiple
orders of magnitude
Lithology
identification
Forward simulation Overall accuracy =
91.5%; shale F1 =
0.96±0.01; fine
sandstone F1 = 0.92
±0.02
Strong performance
on dominant
lithology classes
Reservoir-parameter
prediction
Forward simulation Vsh𝑅 2 = 0.9959±
0.0012; POR𝑅 2 =
0.9392±0.0087; SW
𝑅2 = 0.9477±0.0073
High accuracy across
all three core
reservoir parameters
Reservoir-parameter
prediction
SPWLA VSH𝑅 2 = 0.9287±
0.012; PHIF𝑅 2 =
0.8863±0.015; SW
𝑅2 = 0.8945±0.013
Meets the practical
threshold of𝑅 2 ≥
0.85
Fluid judgment SPWLA Accuracy = 91.3%;
reservoir-potential
consistency = 85.6%
Uses predicted
parameters and
domain rules
12

===== PAGE 13 =====

2.8 Comparison with expert-assisted interpretation and AI baselines
We compared Auto-Logging with an expert-assisted conventional workflow in which three se-
nior logging interpreters used industry-standard commercial software. Auto-Logging reduced total
interpretation time from approximately 14 h to 25.3 min, increased consistency across repeated
interpretations, and greatly reduced manual intervention. The gain should not be interpreted as re-
placing geological experts; rather, it indicates that repetitive workflow execution can be automated
while experts retain responsibility for verification, high-stakes decisions and edge-case review.
We also compared Auto-Logging with task-specific AI baselines retrained under the same
hardware conditions, including Transformer-based, graph-based, CNN-LSTM and MLP-ensemble
models for logging interpretation (1, 18, 19, 20).Some single-task baselines achieved slightly better
performance for an individual parameter, but they did not provide complete workflow coordination,
adaptive exception handling or standardized report generation. Auto-Logging therefore offers a
different advantage: balanced multi-task performance combined with end-to-end automation and
traceable workflow control (Table 5).
2.9 Ablation analysis identifies the contribution of domain grounding and
adaptive control
Ablation experiments confirmed that Auto-Logging’s performance depends on the interaction of do-
main grounding, LLM scheduling and adaptive feedback (Table 6. Removing retrieval-augmented
generation reduced task compliance and lowered average parameter-prediction reliability, showing
that workflow planning benefits from explicit petrophysical knowledge rather than generic reason-
ing alone. Replacing adaptive planning with a fixed pipeline sharply reduced task-decomposition
accuracy and approximately doubled processing time, demonstrating that workflow adaptation is
necessary when data conditions vary. Replacing the larger Planner with a smaller model preserved
basic execution ability but reduced performance on complex reasoning and fine-grained workflow
revision (36, 38, 45).
13

===== PAGE 14 =====

Table 5: Practical comparison between Auto-Logging and alternative interpretation approaches.
Comparator Strength Limitation relative to
Auto-Logging
Expert-assisted conventional
workflow
High domain expertise and
flexible judgement
Slow, labor-intensive and less
reproducible across
interpreters
Transformer-Log Strong single-task PHIF
prediction
No complete workflow
control or dynamic exception
handling
GNN-Petrophysics Uses relationships among
curves
Requires external
orchestration and reporting
CNN-LSTM Hybrid Captures spatial and
sequential features
Limited end-to-end
automation
MLP-Ensemble Simple and stable baseline Weak workflow adaptivity
and limited physical
validation
Auto-Logging End-to-end orchestration,
physical validation, adaptive
control and report generation
Requires curated domain
knowledge base and reliable
component registry
2.10 Error analysis
Two important discrepancy patterns were observed in the SPWLA experiments. First, some intervals
showed disagreement between predicted porosity and reference labels when the neutron porosity
curve was high and the density curve was low. This combination is physically consistent with high
porosity, whereas the reference labels indicated low porosity. The discrepancy may therefore reflect
label limitations rather than model failure. This illustrates a useful property of physics-constrained
agents: they can expose potentially inconsistent labels when model outputs better align with physical
curve relationships.
Second, VSH predictions were accurate in shallow intervals but underestimated in some deeper
14

===== PAGE 15 =====

Table 6: Ablation summary.
Variant Observed effect Interpretation
No RAG Task-decomposition accuracy
decreased and average
parameter R2 declined
Knowledge grounding
improves procedural
correctness and physical
compliance
Fixed pipeline / no adaptive
planning
Task-decomposition accuracy
dropped markedly; processing
time increased to 45.2 min
Dynamic workflow revision is
central to reliability and
efficiency
Smaller Planner model Acceptable average R2 but
weaker complex reasoning
Large-model capacity is most
valuable in edge cases and
multi-step revisions
Full Auto-Logging Best balance of automation,
accuracy and reliability
Benefits come from
system-level coordination, not
a single model alone
intervals. Possible causes include changes in shale mineral composition that weaken gamma-ray
response and insufficient representation of deep-interval samples in the training set. These cases
show that Auto-Logging should be deployed as a human-auditable decision-support system rather
than as an unchecked autonomous authority. When geological settings fall outside the coverage
of the knowledge base or training data, the system should flag uncertainty and escalate to experts
(Fig. 4).
15

===== PAGE 16 =====

Figure 3: Example Auto-Logging interpretation result on forward-simulated data. The output
integrates curve tracks, lithology, reservoir-parameter predictions and interval-level interpretation
results into a report-ready well-log display.
16

===== PAGE 17 =====

Figure 4: Example Auto-Logging interpretation result on the SPWLA real-world dataset. The figure
illustrates integrated curve tracks, predicted reservoir parameters and interval-level interpretation
outputs under realistic logging conditions.
17

===== PAGE 18 =====

3 Discussion
Auto-Logging demonstrates that language-model agents can contribute to scientific automation
when their role is carefully constrained (34, 38). The LLM agents do not replace numerical models
and do not directly produce petrophysical predictions. Instead, they coordinate specialized compo-
nents through explicit task plans, structured interfaces and physical validation rules. This design
addresses a central challenge in scientific AI: moving from isolated prediction models to complete
workflows that are reproducible, adaptive and auditable.
The most important result is therefore architectural rather than only numerical. Auto-Logging
shows how domain knowledge, tool orchestration, exception handling and reporting can be inte-
grated into a single closed-loop system. In this framework, expert knowledge is not discarded; it
is formalized as retrievable procedures, physical thresholds, dependency rules and validation crite-
ria (16, 37). Experts remain essential for defining the knowledge base, reviewing abnormal cases,
correcting new geological scenarios and making final operational decisions.
The study also clarifies the boundary between general-purpose AI agents and domain-grounded
scientific agents. A general agent can decompose instructions and call tools, but scientific workflow
execution requires a stronger contract: task dependencies must be explicit, inputs and outputs must
follow validated schemas, numerical results must satisfy physical constraints, and failures must
be escalated rather than hidden (30, 31, 34). Auto-Logging implements this contract in well-log
interpretation and thereby provides a reusable design pattern for other data-intensive domains,
including geophysical inversion, environmental monitoring, materials characterization, biomedical
image analysis, bioresource upgrading, AI-powered materials science, nanomedicine and machine-
learning microfluidic monitoring (3, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 44).
Several limitations remain. First, generalization depends on the coverage of the knowledge
base and the model library. Extending Auto-Logging to carbonate reservoirs, shale gas reservoirs
or other geological settings will require additional domain rules, calibration data and validation
cases. Second, LLMs can still make reasoning errors in rare or ambiguous conditions, so audit logs
and expert-review triggers remain essential. Third, cloud-based deployment provides scalability
but introduces latency, cost and data-governance considerations. Fourth, the present validation
focuses on well-log interpretation; broader claims about scientific workflow automation should be
18

===== PAGE 19 =====

supported by additional cross-domain demonstrations.
Future work should therefore expand the knowledge base, add uncertainty quantification to every
tool invocation, test well-level transfer across geological settings, implement stronger provenance
tracking, and benchmark against additional agentic baselines. A particularly important direction
is continual learning under expert supervision, where corrected edge cases are used to update the
knowledge base and improve future workflow decisions. With these extensions, domain-grounded
LLM agents could become a practical foundation for reliable and human-auditable scientific work-
flow automation.
4 Methods
4.1 System overview
Auto-Logging contains four layers: an LLM-based Planner, an LLM-based Executor, a model/tool
library and a cloud service layer. The Planner performs intent parsing, knowledge retrieval, workflow
construction and adaptive revision. The Executor converts tasks into structured commands, invokes
models or tools, verifies returned results and reports execution status. The model/tool library
contains preprocessing utilities and specialized numerical models. The cloud service layer provides
standardized APIs, storage, authentication and deployment management.
4.2 Prompt and retrieval design
Planner and Executor prompts use a modular structure containing role definition, task specification,
domain constraints, output schemas and examples. The Planner prompt emphasizes petrophysical
workflow logic, dependency ordering and physical validation. The Executor prompt emphasizes pa-
rameter formatting, model invocation, result checking and exception feedback. Retrieval-augmented
generation uses a structured knowledge base compiled from petrophysical procedures, standard log-
interpretation workflows, curve-response relationships and parameter validity rules (16, 35). The
evaluated implementation used a versioned instruction-tuned LLM backbone, with decoding set-
tings, prompt version and model identity recorded for each run (36, 38, 45).
19

===== PAGE 20 =====

4.3 Preprocessing
Preprocessing includes data loading, curve validation, outlier detection, missing-segment localiza-
tion, depth-consistency checking, curve normalization and transformation of high-dynamic-range
resistivity curves. Sporadic outliers are corrected while extended missing or abnormal segments
are passed to the imputation model. All preprocessing outputs are stored with metadata that link
each corrected interval to the operation that produced it.
4.4 Numerical models
Missing-curve imputation is performed by an LSTM-based sequence model using complete auxil-
iary curves as input. Lithology identification uses a 2D convolutional neural network over local depth
windows and multiple curve features. Reservoir-parameter prediction uses a multi-task recurrent
network with shared sequential representation and task-specific heads for shale volume, porosity
and water saturation. Fluid identification combines predicted parameters, resistivity features and
domain rules or classification models depending on the available labels.
4.5 Workflow execution
For each user request, the Planner generates a structured task plan with dependencies, required in-
puts, target tools or models and expected validation criteria. The Executor checks whether required
inputs are available, formats requests according to the component registry, invokes the correspond-
ing service and returns structured execution summaries. The Planner decides whether the workflow
can continue, should be revised or requires expert intervention.
4.6 Evaluation
Evaluation used forward-simulated and SPWLA real-world well-log data. The forward-simulated
dataset supported full-process validation because all target quantities were known. The SPWLA
dataset tested performance on realistic curves and interpretation labels. We evaluated predictive
performance using accuracy, precision, recall, F1 score, MAE, MSE and R2, and evaluated workflow
20

===== PAGE 21 =====

performance using processing time, task-decomposition accuracy, invocation success, manual-
intervention time and completion rate.
4.7 Expert and baseline comparison
For the expert-assisted baseline, senior interpreters completed the same interpretation tasks using
commercial software. For AI baselines, representative task-specific models were trained or retrained
under comparable hardware conditions. Comparisons emphasized not only single-task accuracy
but also workflow completeness, dynamic coordination capability, automation level and report-
generation ability.
4.8 Ablation experiments
Ablations removed retrieval-augmented generation, replaced adaptive planning with a fixed pipeline,
or replaced the larger Planner model with a smaller model. Each variant was evaluated on task-
decomposition accuracy, model-scheduling success, processing time, parameter-prediction perfor-
mance and manual-intervention frequency.
4.9 Statistical analysis
Reported values are presented as mean±standard deviation where repeated tests were available.
R2, MAE and MSE were computed on held-out test intervals or wells according to the evaluation
setting. Classification metrics were computed per class and as overall task accuracy. Consistency
between repeated interpretations was assessed using intraclass correlation when applicable.
21

===== PAGE 22 =====

References and Notes
1. Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, G. Hinton, Deep learning.Nature521(7553), 436–444 (2015).
2. J. Jumper,et al., Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold.Nature
596(7873), 583–589 (2021).
3. A. Merchant,et al., Scaling deep learning for materials discovery.Nature624(7990), 80–85
(2023).
4. M. Yu,et al., Deep learning large-scale drug discovery and repurposing.Nature Computational
Science4, 600–614 (2024).
5. S. Zhang,et al., A generalist foundation model and database for open-world medical image
segmentation.Nature Biomedical Engineeringpp. 1–16 (2025).
6. F. Dai,et al., Improving AI models for rare thyroid cancer subtype by text guided diffusion
models.Nature Communications16(1), 4449 (2025).
7. J. Wang,et al., Discovery of antimicrobial peptides with notable antibacterial potency by an
LLM-based foundation model.Science advances11(10), eads8932 (2025).
8. X. Zhang, Y. Wang, AI-recognized mitochondrial phenotype enables identification of drug
targets (2024).
9. I. Price,et al., Probabilistic weather forecasting with machine learning.Nature637(8044),
84–90 (2025).
10. R. Lam,et al., Learning skillful medium-range global weather forecasting.Science382(6677),
1416–1421 (2023).
11. F. Li,et al., Bioresource upgrade for sustainable energy, environment, and biomedicine.Nano-
Micro Letters15(1), 35 (2023).
12. X. Bai, X. Zhang, Artificial intelligence-powered materials science.Nano-micro letters17(1),
135 (2025).
22

===== PAGE 23 =====

13. G. Luo,et al., Artificial intelligence-powered nanomedicine.Chemical Society Reviews(2026).
14. N. Yang,et al., Machine-Learning Microfluidic Minute-Scale Microorganism Metrics Moni-
toring (M6).Advanced Sciencep. e21106 (2026).
15. C. Shen,et al., Differentiable modelling to unify machine learning and physical models for
geosciences.Nature Reviews Earth & Environment4(8), 552–567 (2023).
16. D. V. Ellis, J. M. Singer,et al.,Well logging for earth scientists, vol. 692 (Springer) (2007).
17. S. Misra, H. Li, J. He,Machine learning for subsurface characterization(Gulf Professional
Publishing) (2019).
18. X. Wu,et al., Sensing prior constraints in deep neural networks for solving exploration geo-
physical problems.Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences120(23), e2219573120
(2023).
19. S. Hochreiter, J. Schmidhuber, Long short-term memory.Neural computation9(8), 1735–1780
(1997).
20. A. Vaswani,et al., Attention is all you need.Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems30(2017).
21. B. Wang,et al., Smartphone-based platforms implementing microfluidic detection with image-
based artificial intelligence.Nature Communications14(1), 1341 (2023).
22. T. Li,et al., Virus detection light diffraction fingerprints for biological applications.Science
Advances10(11), eadl3466 (2024).
23. N. Yang,et al., Minimum minutes machine-learning microfluidic microbe monitoring method
(M7).ACS nano18(6), 4862–4870 (2024).
24. N. Yang,et al., Deep-learning terahertz single-cell metabolic viability study.ACS nano17(21),
21383–21393 (2023).
25. L. Liu,et al., Artificial intelligence-powered microfluidics for nanomedicine and materials
synthesis.Nanoscale13(46), 19352–19366 (2021).
23

===== PAGE 24 =====

26. H. Liu,et al., Machine-learning mental-fatigue-measuring𝜇m-thick elastic epidermal elec-
tronics (MMMEEE).Nano Letters24(51), 16221–16230 (2024).
27. X. Wang, P. Xie, B. Chen, X. Zhang, Chip-based high-dimensional optical neural network.
Nano-Micro Letters14(1), 221 (2022).
28. D. A. Boiko, R. MacKnight, B. Kline, G. Gomes, Autonomous chemical research with large
language models.Nature624(7992), 570–578 (2023).
29. A. M. Bran,et al., Augmenting large language models with chemistry tools.Nature Mchine
Intelligence6(5), 525–535 (2024).
30. V. Mavroudis, LangChain v0. 3.GitHub repository(2024).
31. G. Significant, AutoGPT.GitHub repository(2023).
32. K. Swanson, W. Wu, N. L. Bulaong, J. E. Pak, J. Zou, The Virtual Lab of AI agents designs
new SARS-CoV-2 nanobodies.Nature646(8085), 716–723 (2025).
33. N. J. Szymanski,et al., An autonomous laboratory for the accelerated synthesis of inorganic
materials.Nature624(7990), 86 (2023).
34. H. Xin, J. R. Kitchin, H. J. Kulik, Towards agentic science for advancing scientific discovery.
Nature Machine Intelligence7(9), 1373–1375 (2025).
35. J. Dagdelen,et al., Structured information extraction from scientific text with large language
models.Nature communications15(1), 1418 (2024).
36. J. Wei,et al., Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models.Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems35, 24824–24837 (2022).
37. A. Clark, Extending minds with generative AI.Nature Communications16(1), 4627 (2025).
38. L. Zhou,et al., Larger and more instructable language models become less reliable.Nature
634(8032), 61–68 (2024).
39. B. Romera-Paredes,et al., Mathematical discoveries from program search with large language
models.Nature625(7995), 468–475 (2024).
24

===== PAGE 25 =====

40. X. Li,et al., Transvascular transport of nanocarriers for tumor delivery.Nature communications
15(1), 8172 (2024).
41. Z. Yang,et al., Thermal immuno-nanomedicine in cancer.Nature reviews Clinical oncology
20(2), 116–134 (2023).
42. Y. Wang,et al., Nature-inspired micropatterns.Nature Reviews Methods Primers3(1), 68
(2023).
43. Y. Yang,et al., A non-printed integrated-circuit textile for wireless theranostics.Nature com-
munications12(1), 4876 (2021).
44. K. R. Lennon, G. H. McKinley, J. W. Swan, Scientific machine learning for modeling and simu-
lating complex fluids.Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences120(27), e2304669120
(2023).
45. . Qwen Team,et al., Qwen3 technical report.arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388(2025).
Acknowledgments
Funding:This work is supported by the National Science and Technology Major Project for New
Oil and Gas Exploration and Development (Grant No. 2025ZD1401102).
Author contributions:The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests
or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
•Rongbo Shao: Conceptualization, methodology, software, validation, formal analysis, writing
(original draft), visualization.
•Guangzhi Liao: Validation, formal analysis, writing (review & editing), supervision.
•Xingcai Zhang: Methodology guidance, Validation, formal analysis, writing (review & edit-
ing).
•Jun Zhou: Resources, data curation, validation, writing (review & editing), project adminis-
tration.
25

===== PAGE 26 =====

•Juan Zhang: Resources, data curation, validation, writing (review & editing), funding acqui-
sition.
•Xianzhi Song: Conceptualization, methodology guidance.
•Lizhi Xiao: Conceptualization, methodology guidance, supervision, writing (review & edit-
ing), funding acquisition.
Competing interests:The authors declare no competing interests.
Data, code and materials availability:The datasets and source code of this study are available
at github
AI Declaration:In the development of this study, generative large language models (LLMs) were
not used for core research components, including the programming and training of lightweight
domain models, the design of the overall experimental workflow, or the formulation of prompt
engineering strategies.
For the construction of the agent-based framework, two open-source LLMs (Qwen 7B and Qwen
32B) were employed solely as functional modules to support high-level workflow reasoning and
planning, which forms an integral part of the proposed Auto-Logging system. Importantly, these
LLMs were not involved in any numerical computations, such as reservoir parameter prediction,
lithology classification, or fluid identification—all such professional numerical tasks were carried
out by dedicated domain-specific models.
During manuscript preparation, the overall research ideas, article structure, experimental
methodologies, and figure design were independently conceived and completed by the authors.
Generative AI was used only for minor language polishing to enhance the clarity and fluency of
academic expression, without altering the scientific content or conclusions. All references cited in
the manuscript are verifiable and have been properly acknowledged in accordance with academic
standards.
26

===== PAGE 27 =====

Supplementary materials
Materials and Methods
Supplementary Text
Figs. S1 to S9
Tables S1 to S9
27

===== PAGE 28 =====

Supplementary Materials for
Domain-grounded LLM agents for reliable orchestration of
physics-constrained scientific workflows
Rongbo Shao, Guangzhi liao, Xingcai Zhang Jun Zhou, Juan Zhang, Xianzhi Song, Lizhi Xiao∗
∗Corresponding author. Email:xiaolizhi@cup.edu.cn
This PDF file includes:
Structured Prompt Frameworks
Prompt for the Planner
Prompt for the Executor
Structure of Small Models and Tools Used in Auto-logging
Deployment, Encapsulation and Invocation Mechanism of Models and Tools
Experimental Details and Supplementary Analyses
S1

===== PAGE 29 =====

Structured Prompt Frameworks
This section elaborates on the granular design of the prompt engineering framework underpinning
the Planner and Executor agents, providing the technical specifications that enable reliable, domain-
aligned LLM behavior.
Core Prompt Architecture
Figure S1: Prompt Engineering Elements and Examples of Prompt Writing for the Planner and
Executor.
As illustrated in Fig. S1, each agent’s prompt is constructed using a modular, two-tier struc-
ture that separates mandatory functional elements from optional performance-enhancing compo-
nents, ensuring consistency while allowing adaptability to complex geoscientific tasks.Mandatory
Prompt Elements
These foundational components establish the agent’s functional identity and enforce task align-
ment:
1. Role Definition: Explicitly frames the agent’s domain-specific persona to anchor LLM rea-
soning. The Planner is defined as a ”senior logging interpretation workflow architect” with
S2

===== PAGE 30 =====

expertise in petrophysical logic and dynamic workflow adjustment, while the Executor is des-
ignated a ”precision tool orchestrator” specializing in model invocation and result validation.
2. Skill Enumeration: Outlines technical competencies tailored to the agent’s role. The Plan-
ner’s skills include geological context integration, task dependency mapping, and adaptive
workflow revision, whereas the Executor’s skills focus on API orchestration, numerical result
verification, and error diagnostics.
3. Task Specification: Articulates action-oriented objectives with clear input-output require-
ments. The Planner’s task is to decompose user requests into physics-compliant, stepwise
workflows, while the Executor’s task is to translate these workflows into executable commands
and validate outputs against petrophysical constraints.
4. Output Schema: Mandates adherence to a machine-parsable JSON format with strict field
validation. For the Planner, outputs require structured task sequences with unique Instruc-
tion ID, Task Params, and Timestamp fields. The Executor’s outputs include command logs,
result metrics, and error codes aligned with the system’s taxonomy (Init/Execute/Feedback-
/Adjust/Alarm).
Optional Performance-Enhancing Components
These supplementary elements reduce ambiguity and improve robustness in high-complexity
scenarios:
1. Contextual Input: Provides well-specific metadata (e.g., wellbore ID, log curve availability)
to ground the agent’s reasoning in real geological data.
2. Annotated Examples: Includes 2–3 few-shot demonstrations of valid task decomposition and
command generation, reinforcing compliance with JSON schemas and domain constraints.
3. Domain Constraints: Embeds petrophysical validation rules (e.g., confidence threshold be-
tween 0.5–0.9, curve list as a standardized log curve abbreviation array) to ensure outputs
align with industry standards.
S3

===== PAGE 31 =====

Agent-Specific Prompt Optimization
Planner Prompts
Planner prompts prioritize cognitive coherence and scientific validity, with embedded mecha-
nisms to mitigate LLM hallucinations:
1. Schema Enforcement: Prompts include full JSON schema definitions to enable self-validation
of output structure, prohibiting unstructured text and ensuring compatibility with the Execu-
tor’s command parser.
2. Dependency Awareness: Explicitly encodes petrophysical dependencies (e.g., lithology clas-
sification preceding porosity prediction) into prompt instructions, ensuring workflows adhere
to geological reasoning.
Executor Prompts
Executor prompts focus on precision and reliability, with built-in error handling to maintain
workflow continuity:
1. Error Diagnostics: Prompts include templates for structured error messages (e.g., ”Missing
Instruction ID field”) that trigger targeted Planner corrections at Level 1 of the fallback
mechanism.
2. Dependency Awareness: Explicitly encodes petrophysical dependencies (e.g., lithology clas-
sification preceding porosity prediction) into prompt instructions, ensuring workflows adhere
to geological reasoning.2.Result Validation: Mandates cross-checking of numerical outputs
against physical constraints (e.g., porosity values between 0–1), with automated feedback to
the Planner for parameter adjustments if thresholds are violated.
This modular framework ensures that prompts are both domain-informed and functionally ro-
bust, providing a replicable template for building AI agents in knowledge-intensive engineering
applications. The explicit separation of mandatory and optional components balances standardiza-
tion with flexibility, enabling the system to adapt to evolving geological scenarios while maintaining
industrial-grade reliability.
S4

===== PAGE 32 =====

Prompt for the Planner
This is the English translation of the original Chinese prompt for the Planner, preserving its domain
constraints and structural design.
## Role Definition
You are the core task planning component of the Auto-Logging intelligent logging interpreta-
tion system, equipped with logging domain expertise (covering reservoir interpretation logic for
sandstone-mudstone and other lithologies, standard logging interpretation workflows), strong nat-
ural language understanding capabilities, chain-of-thought reasoning capabilities, and contextual
dynamic adaptation capabilities. Guided by user needs and based on professional standards, you
are responsible for the overall planning and dynamic adjustment of logging interpretation tasks.
## Context and Skill Background
### Skill 1: **Core Logging Interpretation Workflow**
You must proficiently master the full-link links of logging interpretation, including but not
limited to:
Data quality control (outlier detection, curve consistency verification);
Data preprocessing (bad value removal, curve normalization, depth correction);
Automatic stratification (formation interface identification based on GR and AC curves);
Professional task execution (data imputation, lithology identification, reservoir parameter pre-
diction, fluid identification);
Interpretation report generation (stratification results, parameter tables, conclusions and recom-
mendations).
### Skill 2: **User Demand Types**
You can handle simple demands (e.g., ”Complete full-process logging interpretation for Well
XX”) and complex demands (e.g., ”For high-salinity sandstone-mudstone reservoirs in Block
XX, focus on interpreting porosity and oil saturation, and ignore dry layer analysis”). You must
accurately capture core information such as ”well ID, reservoir type, interpretation focus, and
special constraints”.
### Skill 3: **Feedback Adaptation Rules** You can receive intermediate results fed back by
the Executor (e.g., ”3 outliers still exist in the AC curve after data preprocessing”, ”The accuracy
S5

===== PAGE 33 =====

of the lithology identification model for siltstone is 82%”) and adjust the plan based on logging
professional logic (e.g., adding a ”manual outlier review step”, ”supplementing siltstone logging
response feature samples to the model”).
### Skill 4: **Interpretation Report Generation**
You can generate interpretation reports in accordance with the following formats and require-
ments:
- Paragraph 1:<Geological Background>
— Writing Requirements: Based on the<Oilfield Name>and<Oil-Gas Exploration Target
Layer>in the input JSON format, use your existing knowledge to write a paragraph including
the location of the oilfield, the lithological composition, sedimentary continuity, porosity, and
permeability of the oil-gas exploration target layer.
- Paragraph 2:<Logging Data Processing>
— Writing Requirements: Based on the corresponding model names of<Porosity Model>,
<Shale Content Model>, and<Water Saturation Model>in the input JSON format, output according
to the following template:
—- Template:
Shale Content (VSH) Calculation: Shale content is mainly calculated using Gamma Ray (GR)
and Photoelectric Factor (PEF), and corrected by Caliper (CAL). In this report, the Shale Content
Model is adopted to predict shale content based on conventional logging curves.
Porosity (PHIF) Calculation: Porosity is mainly calculated using Density Logging (DEN) and
Neutron Logging (NEU), and then corrected by shale content. In this report, the Porosity Model is
adopted to predict porosity based on conventional logging curves.
Water Saturation (SW) Calculation: Water saturation is mainly calculated using Deep Resistivity
(RDEP) and Medium Resistivity (RMED), and then corrected by porosity and shale content. In this
report, the Water Saturation Model is adopted to predict water saturation based on conventional
logging curves.
- Paragraph 3:<Oil-Gas-Water Evaluation of Logging Data>
— Writing Requirements: Based on the input and output parameter data of each stratified layer
in the input JSON format, use Skill 1 to judge parameter levels and Skill 2 to judge oil-water layers.
Correlate the oil-water layer judgment results with each stratified layer and write content according
S6

===== PAGE 34 =====

to the following template:
—- Template:
Based on the logging curve characteristics of Well Well ID, combined with geological mud
logging data and adjacent well data, the target interval has been processed and comprehensively
evaluated. All oil-bearing intervals and some representative water layers are identified, totaling x
layers. The lithology, physical properties, electrical properties, and oil-bearing properties of oil
(gas) layers and water layers are described and analyzed as follows:
Layer 1: XXX-XXX m, Thickness: XXX m. Analysis of logging curves shows that the average
deep lateral resistivity is XXXΩ·𝑚, the average medium lateral resistivity is XXXΩ·𝑚, the
average gamma ray is XXX API, and the average neutron porosity is XXX%. Calculation results:
shale content is XXX%, porosity is XXX%, water saturation is XXX%. Comprehensive evaluation:
XXX layer.
Layer 2: XXX-XXX m, Thickness: XXX m. Analysis of logging curves shows that the average
deep lateral resistivity is XXXΩ·𝑚, the average medium lateral resistivity is XXXΩ·𝑚, the
average gamma ray is XXX API, and the average neutron porosity is XXX%. Calculation results:
shale content is XXX%, porosity is XXX%, water saturation is XXX%. Comprehensive evaluation:
XXX layer.
Layer 3: XXX-XXX m, Thickness: XXX m. Analysis of logging curves shows that the average
deep lateral resistivity is XXXΩ·𝑚, the average medium lateral resistivity is XXXΩ·𝑚, the
average gamma ray is XXX API, and the average neutron porosity is XXX%. Calculation results:
shale content is XXX%, porosity is XXX%, water saturation is XXX%. Comprehensive evaluation:
XXX layer.
Layer 4: XXX-XXX m, Thickness: XXX m. Analysis of logging curves shows that the average
deep lateral resistivity is XXXΩ·𝑚, the average medium lateral resistivity is XXXΩ·𝑚, the
average gamma ray is XXX API, and the average neutron porosity is XXX%. Calculation results:
shale content is XXX%, porosity is XXX%, water saturation is XXX%. Comprehensive evaluation:
XXX layer.
## Core Task Instructions
### Task 1: - Demand Parsing
#### Task 1.1 - After receiving the user’s natural language logging demand, first supplement
S7

===== PAGE 35 =====

missing information through inquiries (e.g., if the user only says ”Interpret Well XX”, ask ”Is there
a specified reservoir type, interpretation focus, or special geological conditions?”).
#### Task 1.2 - Extract core demand elements to form a ”Demand Summary” (Format: Well
ID - Reservoir Type - Interpretation Objectives - Constraints) to ensure no ambiguity.
### Task Task 2: - Task Decomposition
Based on professional logging workflows, decompose user demands into executable and ordered
steps. Each step must clarify ”task name, execution logic, dependent preceding steps, and associated
tools/models”.Example: If the demand is ”Interpret sandstone-mudstone reservoirs in Well A,
focusing on outputting porosity and fluid type”, decompose into:
#### step 1: Data Quality Control (use raw logging data, invoke data quality control tool);
#### step 2: Data Preprocessing (depend on quality-controlled data, invoke preprocessing tool);
#### step 3: LSTM Data Imputation (if AC, CNL, or RT curves are missing, invoke imputation
model);
#### step 4: 2D-CNN Lithology Identification (depend on preprocessed conventional logging
data, invoke lithology identification model);
#### step 5: Bi-LSTM Reservoir Parameter Prediction (calculate porosity, shale content, and
water saturation based on conventional logging data, invoke reservoir parameter model);
#### step 6: KNN Fluid Identification (depend on reservoir parameter prediction results and
conventional logging data, invoke fluid model);
#### step 7: Report Generation (include lithology identification results, reservoir parameter
prediction results, and fluid identification results, invoke report tool).
### Task 3: - Dynamic Plan Adjustment
#### Task 3.1 - After receiving intermediate results fed back by the Executor, complete analysis
within 10 seconds: if the results meet expectations (e.g., ”Data qualification rate≥95% after
preprocessing”), proceed with the original plan.
#### 3.2 - If the results are abnormal (e.g., ”Model invocation failed”, ”Parameter prediction𝑅2
<0.85”), adjust the plan (e.g., switch to a backup model, add data augmentation steps, supplement
manual intervention nodes).
## Output Format Requirements
Output in the form of structured table + natural language explanation as follows:
S8

===== PAGE 36 =====

### Demand Summary: Extracted core elements of user demand, e.g., ”Well ID: A123; Reser-
voir Type: Sandstone-Mudstone; Interpretation Objectives: Porosity + Fluid Identification; Con-
straints: Ignore dry layers”
### Task Execution Plan Table:
|Step ID|Task Name|Execution Content|Dependent Preceding Steps|Associated Tools/-
Models|Expected Result Standards|
|——–|—————-|————————————————————————–|————–
|———————|——————————|
|1|Data Quality Control|Detect outliers in GR, AC, and DEN curves; verify curve depth
consistency|-|Data Quality Control Tool|Outlier ratio<5%, depth deviation<0.5m|
|2|Data Preprocessing|Remove bad values; normalize AC curve (refer to block average of 280
𝜇𝑠/𝑚)|Step 1|Preprocessing Tool|Continuous curves without breaks; normalization deviation
<10%|
|3|Data Imputation|Impute missing curves of AC, CNL, or RT|Step 1|Data Imputation
Model|Continuous curves without breaks|
|4|Lithology Identification|Predict lithology based on conventional logging curves|Step 2|
Lithology Identification Model|Model accuracy on the test set>0.90|
|5|Reservoir Parameter Prediction|Predict reservoir parameters (e.g., porosity, shale content,
water saturation) based on conventional logging curves|Steps 2 and 4|Reservoir Parameter
Prediction Model|Model𝑅 2 on the test set>0.85|
|6|Fluid Identification|Predict fluid type (e.g., oil layer, water layer, oil-water layer) based
on conventional logging curves|Steps 2, 4 and 5|Fluid Identification Model|Model accuracy on
the test set>0.90|
|7|Report Generation|Generate an interpretation report using the provided template, integrat-
ing lithology identification results, reservoir parameter prediction results, and fluid identification
results|Steps 4, 5, and 6|Planner|All data in the report is derived from calculations of small
models and automated tools, with no arbitrary assumptions by the Planner; the generated report
complies with the required format|
### Supplementary Explanation:
— Step 3 is only executed if the AC curve missing rate in Step 2>10
S9

===== PAGE 37 =====

— If the porosity prediction𝑅 2 <0.85 in Step 5, feedback to the user whether to supplement
core calibration data
## Notes
### Note 1: - Task decomposition must comply with the industry specifications in Well Logging
Data Processing and Comprehensive Interpretation, avoiding omissions of key links (e.g., data
preprocessing must be completed before reservoir parameter prediction).
### Note 2: - For cross-block logging tasks (e.g., ”Interpret shale reservoirs in Block B”), add a
”block geological feature adaptation” step to the plan (e.g., invoke the block-specific electrofacies
template).
### Note 3: - If the Executor feeds back ”tool/model unavailable”, prioritize switching to the
system’s built-in backup tool (e.g., switch to interpolation imputation tool if the LSTM imputation
model fails) before notifying the user.
Prompt for the Executor
Below is the English translation of the original Chinese prompt for the Executor, retaining its
operational precision and validation requirements.
## Role Definition
You are the core task execution component of the Auto-Logging intelligent logging inter-
pretation system, equipped with logging tool/model invocation capabilities, intermediate result
integration and analysis capabilities, and natural language feedback capabilities. You must strictly
follow the task plan issued by the Planner, accurately execute specific operations, and synchronously
feed back the execution status. You are responsible for the full-process execution of ”instruction
translation - tool invocation - result feedback”.
## Context and Resource Background
### Skill 1: **Data Quality Control and Preprocessing Tools**
#### Skill 1.1: - Data Quality Control Tool: Supports outlier detection for GR, AC, DEN, and
RT curves (based on 3𝜎principle) and depth consistency verification (comparing depth deviations
between CAL and GR curves).
#### Skill 1.2: - Data Preprocessing Tool: Supports bad value removal (linear interpolation
S10

===== PAGE 38 =====

filling), curve normalization (block average standardization), and depth correction (based on casing
collar curves).
### Skill 2: **LSTM Data Imputation Model** Supports imputation of AC, CNL, and RT
curves. Input must include ”well ID, name of the curve to be imputed, and associated curve (CAL/-
DEN/GR) data”. Output includes imputed curve data and MSE (requirement:𝑀 𝑆𝐸 <10𝜇𝑠/𝑚 2
for AC).
### Skill 3: **2D-CNN Lithology Identification Model**
Supports identification of medium sandstone, fine sandstone, siltstone, and mudstone. Input
is ”preprocessed GR+AC+DEN curve data”. Output includes lithology classification results and
accuracy (requirement: overall accuracy≥90%).
### Skill 4: **Hard-Shared Bi-LSTM Reservoir Parameter Model**
Supports prediction of shale content, porosity, and water saturation. Input is ”lithology iden-
tification results + logging curve data”. Output includes parameter values and𝑅 2 (requirement:
𝑅2 >0.85).
### Skill 5: **KNN Fluid Identification Model** Supports identification of oil layers, oil-
bearing water layers, water layers, and dry layers. Input is ”porosity + water saturation + RT data”.
Output includes fluid type and confidence (requirement: accuracy≥90%).
## Core Task Instructions
### Task 1: - Instruction Parsing
Receive natural language task instructions from the Planner (e.g., ”Perform data preprocessing
on Well A123, focusing on AC curve normalization”) and decompose them into ”target well ID,
task type, core operations, and parameter requirements” to ensure no understanding deviations.
### Task 2: - Execution Command Generation
#### Task 2.1 - For tool invocation: Generate commands in the format of ”Tool Name + Pa-
rameter Configuration”. Example: ”Data Preprocessing Tool; Well ID: A123; Operation: AC curve
normalization; Reference Average: 280𝜇𝑠/𝑚; Output: Normalized AC curve data + Normalization
Report”.
#### Task 2.2 - For model invocation: Generate commands in the format of ”Model Name +
Input Data + Accuracy Requirement”. Example: ”2D-CNN Lithology Identification Model; Input:
Preprocessed GR (0-200 API), AC (200-400𝜇𝑠/𝑚), DEN (2.0-2.8𝑔/𝑐𝑚 3) data of Well A123;
S11

===== PAGE 39 =====

Accuracy Requirement: Overall accuracy≥88%; Output: Stratified lithology results + Accuracy
Report”.
### Task 3: - Intermediate Result Integration and Feedback
#### Task 3.1 - After tool/model execution, analyze results from three aspects: ”data quality,
execution accuracy, and abnormal conditions”. For example:
After data preprocessing: Explain ”3 outliers removed, data qualification rate 97%”.
After lithology identification: Explain ”Siltstone identification accuracy 86% (2% below re-
quirement), misclassified interval (2500-2520 m, misclassified as fine sandstone)”.
#### Task 3.2 - Feed back to the Planner in natural language, including ”execution status
(success/abnormal), core results, and adjustment suggestions”. Example: ”2D-CNN lithology iden-
tification task for Well A123 completed (Status: Abnormal); Core Results: Overall accuracy 86%,
siltstone identification fails to meet requirements; Adjustment Suggestions: Supplement core cali-
bration data for the 2500-2520 m interval of the well and re-invoke the model”.
## Output Format Requirements
Output in a three-section format of ”Execution Command + Result Analysis + Feedback Text”
as follows:
### Execution Command:
— Tool/Model Name
— Parameter Configuration (well ID, input data range, accuracy requirement);
— Output Requirement
### Intermediate Result Analysis:
— Data Quality: e.g., ”3 outliers removed, data qualification rate 97%”;
— Execution Accuracy: e.g., ”Porosity prediction𝑅 2 is 0.89, meeting requirements”;
— Abnormal Conditions: e.g., ”No abnormalities / shale identification accuracy fails to meet
requirements”
### Feedback Text (to the Planner):
— Natural language description of execution status and core results;
— Provide adjustment suggestions if abnormal, e.g., ”Data preprocessing task for Well A123
completed successfully with a data qualification rate of 97%, and the process can proceed to the
lithology identification step”
S12

===== PAGE 40 =====

## Notes
### Note 1: - Execution commands must strictly match the parameter format of tools/models.
For example, input data for the LSTM imputation model must be organized in the format of ”depth
point - curve value” to avoid invocation failures due to format errors.
### Note 2: - If tool/model execution times out (exceeding 5 minutes) or outputs empty results,
immediately feed back ”task blockage” to the Planner and suggest switching to backup tools/models.
### Note 3: - Intermediate result analysis must be based on logging professional standards.
For example, porosity𝑅 2 <0.85 must be judged as ”accuracy not meeting requirements”, and
subjective relaxation of standards is not allowed.
Structure of Small Models and Tools Used in Auto-logging
This section provides supplementary technical details for the core small models in the Auto-Logging
system, focusing on unreported architectural parameters, implementation logic, and quantitative
bases that complement the main text.
Outlier Detection Thresholds
Table S1 presents the physically valid value ranges for each logging curve, which serve as the
quantitative basis for outlier screening (consistent with the rule-based validation strategy described
in the main text).
Table S1: Outlier Detection Thresholds
Curve Actual Maximum Value Upper Limit Actual Minimum Value Lower Limit
AC 357.52 400 181.28 180
CAL 22.92 23 19.52 18
CNL 36.98 40 4.38 5
Extended Missing Value Localization Output
Extended missing segments (>40 sampling points) of AC, CNL, and RT curves are recorded in
JSON format for LSTM model invocation. Fig. S2 illustrates the structure of the output JSON file,
S13

===== PAGE 41 =====

including mandatory fields such as well id, curve type, missing start depth, missing end depth,
and sampling interval, ensuring standardized data transfer between the preprocessing tool and
imputation model.
Figure S2: JSON File Generated After the Executor Invokes the Automated Tool to Locate Extended
Missing Values.
Logging Data Imputation Model
The three-layer LSTM network adopts a sequential structure optimized for logging data character-
istics(Fig. S3):
Input Layer: Normalized data of CAL, DEN, RXO, and GR (4 features), with a sequence
length of 20 sampling points (corresponding to 2.5 meters of depth, balancing local correlation and
S14

===== PAGE 42 =====

Figure S3: LSTM-Based Logging Data Imputation Model.
computational efficiency).
Hidden Layer: 32 LSTM units, with a forget gate bias initialized to 1.0 to enhance long-term
dependency preservation; dropout rate = 0.1 to prevent overfitting.
Output Layer: Single-neuron dense layer with linear activation, directly outputting the imputed
value of the target curve (AC/CNL/RT).
Lithology Identification Model
The (8, 8, 1) input tensor is constructed as follows(Fig. S4):
Depth Dimension (8 sampling points): Covers 1 meter of depth (sampling interval = 0.125 m),
capturing vertical lithological continuity without redundant information.
Feature Dimension (8 logging curves): AC, CAL, CNL, DEN, GR, RT, RXO, and SP, selected
to cover acoustic, nuclear, electrical, and borehole geometric properties.
Channel Dimension: Single channel for grayscale-like feature processing, reducing computa-
tional complexity.
Reservoir Parameter Prediction Model
The model structure is shown in Fig. S5.
S15

===== PAGE 43 =====

Figure S4: 2D Convolutional Neural Network Lithology Prediction Model.
Shared Bi-LSTM Layer: 64 units (forward + backward), sequence length = 15 sampling points;
uses tanh activation for hidden states and sigmoid for gate controls.
Private Fully Connected Layers:
•Vsh branch: 2 dense layers (64→32 neurons), ReLU activation
•POR branch: 2 dense layers (64→32 neurons), ReLU activation
•SW branch: 3 dense layers (64→32→16 neurons), ReLU activation (additional layer to
capture complex resistivity-porosity-SW relationships)
Loss Function: Weighted sum of mean squared errors (MSE) for each parameter, with weights
inversely proportional to the parameter’s variance (Vsh: 0.2, POR: 0.3, SW: 0.5).
Fluid Identification Model
Neighbor Count (k): Optimized via 5-fold cross-validation on the training set, k = 7 (balancing
noise resistance and local adaptability)
Distance Metric: Euclidean distance, with feature normalization (min-max scaling to [0,1]) to
eliminate dimension disparities between logging curves
Weighting Scheme: Distance-weighted voting (weight = 1/distance), enhancing the influence
of more similar neighboring samples.
The total algorithm is shown in Algorithm 1
S16

===== PAGE 44 =====

Algorithm 1KNN Five-Class Classification Model
Require:Training dataset𝐷={(𝑥 1, 𝑦1),(𝑥 2, 𝑦2), . . . ,(𝑥 𝑛, 𝑦𝑛)}, where𝑦 𝑖 ∈ {0,1,2,3,4}(5
classes); test sample𝑥; number of neighbors𝑘
Ensure:Predicted class ˆ𝑦for test sample𝑥
1:Initialization:Define a distance metric function distance(𝑎, 𝑏)(using Euclidean distance here)
distance(𝑥, 𝑥 𝑖)=
vt 𝑛∑︁
𝑑=1
(𝑥 𝑑 −𝑥 𝑖,𝑑 )2
2:Calculate Distances:
3:foreach(𝑥 𝑖, 𝑦𝑖) ∈𝐷do
4:Calculate𝑑 𝑖 =distance(𝑥, 𝑥 𝑖)
5:end for
6:Select Neighbors:
7:Sort all distances distance(𝑥, 𝑥 𝑖)in ascending order
8:Select the first𝑘samples corresponding to the smallest distances to form the neighbor set
𝑁={(𝑥 𝑗 , 𝑦 𝑗 ) |𝑗=1,2, . . . , 𝑘}
9:Voting for Classification:
10:Initialize class counters count=[0,0,0,0,0](corresponding to 5 classes)
11:foreach(𝑥 𝑗 , 𝑦 𝑗 ) ∈𝑁 𝑘 (𝑥)do
12:count[𝑦 𝑗 ] ←count[𝑦 𝑗 ] +1
13:end for
14:Find the class index corresponding to the maximum value in count:
ˆ𝑦=arg max
𝑐
count[𝑐]
15:Returnˆ𝑦
S17

===== PAGE 45 =====

Figure S5: Bi-LSTM Multi-Task Reservoir Parameter Prediction Model.
Deployment, Encapsulation and Invocation Mechanism of Models and Tools
This section details the technical implementation of the small model and tool scheduling system
in the Auto-Logging platform, including interface encapsulation via Flask, elastic deployment on
Alibaba Cloud EAS, and standardized invocation through the Bailian Large Model Platform.
Overall Scheduling Architecture
The system adopts a three-tier architecture of ”interface encapsulation→image deployment→
component management” to realize efficient and secure scheduling of models and tools:
Interface Layer: Flask framework provides standardized HTTP interfaces for all models/tools.
Deployment Layer: Alibaba Cloud EAS (Elastic Algorithm Service) enables elastic scaling of
computing resources.
Management Layer: Alibaba Cloud Large Model Platform’s ”Component Management” module
standardizes component registration and configuration.
S18

===== PAGE 46 =====

Flask-Based Interface Encapsulation
Core Working Mechanism
Flask realizes function mapping through a ”Route-View Function” mechanism:
Route Definition: Unique URL paths distinguish different models/tools (e.g., /lstmfill for LSTM
imputation model, /2D cnn lithology classify for lithology identification model).
Request Handling: Supports GET/POST methods, flexibly receiving JSON/formatted input
parameters.
Result Output: Returns structured JSON results, with raw data stored in OSS (Object Storage
Service).
Implementation Example: 2D-CNN Lithology Classification Model.
The encapsulation workflow for the 2D-CNN model is representative of the system’s standard
process:
Route-View Binding: Define route /2D cnn lithology classify associated with view function
2D cnn lithology classify().
Data Parsing: Extract well name, depth range, and curve data from POST requests; load corre-
sponding well data from OSS.
Batch Inference: Invoke preloaded 2D-CNN model for point-by-point depth inference, collecting
lithology categories and confidence scores.
Data Persistence: Generate CSV files with ”Depth-Lithology-Confidence” fields, upload to OSS
(e.g., oss://log-interpretation/well-xxx/lithology-results.csv).
Result Return: Perform automatic stratification (5 consecutive same-lithology points = single
layer) and return industry-standard stratification results in JSON format (Fig. S6).
Advantages of Flask Encapsulation
Unified Integration: All models/tools are encapsulated in a single Flask application, simplifying
system management.
Flexible Expansion: New components only require additional routes and view functions, no
architecture reconstruction.
Standardized Interaction: Consistent parameter transmission and result format reduce invocation
ambiguity.
S19

===== PAGE 47 =====

Figure S6: JSON File Returned After the Executor Invokes the Lithology Prediction Model.
EAS Elastic Deployment Process
Deployment Workflow
Models/tools cannot be directly invoked in EAS, requiring ”Flask encapsulation→Docker
image construction→EAS deployment”:
Package Preparation: Integrate Flask application code, dependency lists (requirements.txt), and
model weight files.
Image Construction: Build Docker images containing all runtime dependencies and executable
code.
Image Registry: Upload images to Alibaba Cloud Container Registry (ACR) for version control.
EAS Deployment: Deploy ACR images to EAS, which allocates independent invocation end-
points (Endpoint).
EAS Service Advantages
Elastic Scaling: Automatically adjusts computing resources based on request volume, ensuring
high-concurrency performance.
Stable Operation: Provides high-availability deployment with fault tolerance and automatic
restart mechanisms.
S20

===== PAGE 48 =====

Resource Isolation: Independent runtime environments for different components avoid mutual
interference.
Standardized Invocation via Bailian Platform
Component Registration Requirements
All EAS-deployed components must be registered in the Bailian Platform’s ”Component Man-
agement” with the following mandatory configurations:
Table S2: Configuration Items and Description
Configuration Item Description
Tool Name Unique identifier (e.g., ”LSTM Logging Data
Imputation”)
Tool Description Functional explanation for LLM
understanding
Invocation Path Combined EAS Endpoint + Flask route
Request Method Primarily POST, supporting batch data
transmission
Submission Format JSON-structured parameters
Input Parameters Name, description, type, transmission method
(Header/Body), mandatory status, passing
mode
Output Parameters Name, description, data type
Invocation Process and Security Mechanism
Configuration Query: Executor retrieves component details from ”Component Management”
to construct requests.
Authentication: Requests carry Alibaba Cloud AccessKey/SecretKey or EAS-generated API
Token in HTTP headers for identity verification.
Request Sending: Executor sends standardized HTTP requests to EAS endpoints according to
component configurations.
S21

===== PAGE 49 =====

Result Reception: Receives JSON-formatted results from Flask services, completing the invo-
cation loop.
Invocation Reliability Guarantee
Security Authentication: Prevents unauthorized access to models/tools and computing re-
sources.
Standardized Configuration: Clear parameter definitions enable accurate LLM-driven request
construction.
Traceable Invocation: All requests and results are logged for debugging and auditing.
Key Technical Specifications
Flask Version: 2.2.3 (compatible with Python 3.8+)
Docker Base Image: Python:3.8-slim
EAS Instance Type: CPU/GPU hybrid deployment (GPU: NVIDIA V100 for deep learning
models)
OSS Storage Format: CSV for raw data, JSON for structured results
Authentication Protocol: Alibaba Cloud RAM (Resource Access Management)
Experimental Details and Supplementary Analyses
Dataset Construction and Preprocessing Details
SPWLA Competition Dataset
The SPWLA competition dataset consists of wireline logging data from 10 onshore exploration
wells, with each well covering a depth range of 1500–3000 ft and a sampling interval of 0.5 ft.
Table S3: Log Curve Types of the SPWLA Competition
Dataset
Curve Name Abbreviation Unit Definition
Well Number WELLNUM - A unique identifier to distinguish different
exploration wells
S22

===== PAGE 50 =====

Table Continued S3
Curve Name Abbreviation Unit Definition
Depth DEPTH ft Formation depth corresponding to the logging
curve
Compressional
Travel Time
DTC ns/ft Propagation time of compressional waves in the
formation
Shear Travel
Time
DTS ns/ft Propagation time of shear waves in the formation
Bit Size BS inch Diameter of the drill bit used for drilling
Bulk Volume of
Water
BVW - Proportion of water volume in the unit volume of
the formation
Caliper CAL inch Actual borehole diameter, used to correct for
borehole effects
Density DEN𝑔/𝑐𝑚 3 Bulk density of formation rocks
Gamma Ray GR API Natural gamma radioactivity intensity of the
formation, used for lithology identification
Neutron Porosity NEU dec Porosity calculated from neutron logging
responses
Photoelectric
Factor
PEF Barn Ability of rocks to absorb gamma rays through
photoelectric effect
Deep Resistivity RDEPΩ·𝑚Formation resistivity at a deep detection radius,
reflecting fluid properties
Medium
Resistivity
RMEDΩ·𝑚Formation resistivity at a medium detection
radius, assisting fluid identification
Rate of
Penetration
ROP m/h Mechanical drilling speed
Porosity PHIF - Proportion of pore space in the unit volume of
rocks (equivalent to percentage)
S23

===== PAGE 51 =====

Table Continued S3
Curve Name Abbreviation Unit Definition
Water Saturation SW - Proportion of water volume to total pore volume
in the pore space
Shale Volume VSH - Volume proportion of shale minerals in the
formation
Forward Simulation Dataset
The simulation targets a sandstone-shale reservoir system, encompassing four lithologies
(medium sandstone, fine sandstone, siltstone, shale; Fig. 7(a)) and five fluid types (oil layer, oil-water
layer, oil-bearing water layer, water layer, dry layer; Fig. 7(b)).
(a) Lithology distribution in the forward simula-
tion dataset.
(b) Fluid types distribution in the forward simulation dataset.
Figure S7: Lithology and Fluid Type Distribution.
S24

===== PAGE 52 =====

Table S4: Log Curve Types of the Forward Simulation
Dataset
Curve Name Abbreviation Unit Definition
Well Number WELLNUM - Unique identifier for distinguishing different
exploration and development wells
Depth DEPTH m Vertical formation depth corresponding to logging
measurement points
Lithology Lithology (text) Lithological type of formation at the
corresponding depth (e.g., sandstone, shale)
Fluid Type Fluid (text) Hydrocarbon fluid type in reservoir pores (e.g.,
oil, water, gas, oil-water mixture)
Porosity POR (fraction) Proportion of pore space volume to the total
volume of rock matrix at a given depth
Matrix Relative
Volume
Vma (fraction) Relative volume proportion of rock skeleton
(matrix) excluding pore space in the total rock
volume
Shale Volume Vsh (fraction) Volume proportion of shale minerals in the
formation rock at the corresponding depth
Water Saturation Sw (fraction) Proportion of water volume to the total pore
volume in reservoir rock pores
Hydrocarbon
Saturation
Sh (fraction) Proportion of hydrocarbon (oil/gas) volume to the
total pore volume in reservoir rock pores
Flushed Zone
Saturation
Sxo (fraction) Fluid saturation in the formation pore zone near
the borehole flushed by drilling fluid filtrate
Sandstone
Relative Volume
Vma1 (fraction) Relative volume proportion of sandstone mineral
components in the rock matrix
Dolomite
Relative Volume
Vma2 (fraction) Relative volume proportion of dolomite mineral
components in the rock matrix
S25

===== PAGE 53 =====

Table Continued S4
Curve Name Abbreviation Unit Definition
Other Grain
Relative Volume
Vma3 (fraction) Relative volume proportion of
non-sandstone/dolomite rock grain components in
the rock matrix
Movable
Hydrocarbon
Saturation
Shm (fraction) Proportion of movable hydrocarbon volume to the
total pore volume in reservoir pores under
reservoir conditions
Residual
Hydrocarbon
Saturation
Shr (fraction) Proportion of residual hydrocarbon volume that
cannot be displaced to the total pore volume in
reservoir pores
Density DEN𝑔/𝑐𝑚 3 Bulk density of formation rock (including rock
matrix and pore fluid)
Acoustic Travel
Time
AC𝜇𝑠/𝑚Propagation time of compressional acoustic waves
passing through per unit length of formation
Neutron Porosity CNL (fraction) Porosity value derived from neutron logging
responses, reflecting the hydrogen content in
formation pores
Deep Resistivity RTΩ·𝑚Formation resistivity measured at a deep detection
radius, reflecting the original fluid properties of
the unflushed formation
Medium
Resistivity
RXOΩ·𝑚Formation resistivity measured at a shallow
detection radius, reflecting the fluid properties of
the borehole near-wellbore zone
Gamma Ray GR gAPI Intensity of natural gamma radiation emitted by
formation radioactive elements, used for lithology
identification and shale volume calculation
S26

===== PAGE 54 =====

Table Continued S4
Curve Name Abbreviation Unit Definition
Spontaneous
Potential
SP mV Natural potential difference between the borehole
and the formation, used for identifying permeable
zones and fluid type discrimination
Caliper CAL cm Actual diameter of the borehole measured by the
caliper tool, used for correcting logging data
affected by borehole enlargement or collapse
Model Architecture and Hyperparameter Settings
Small Model Architectures
LSTM Data Imputation Model: 3-layer bidirectional LSTM (hidden size=128, dropout rate=0.2)
with attention mechanism, optimized using Adam optimizer (learning rate=0.001, batch size=64,
epochs=50);
2D-CNN Lithology Identification Model: 4 convolutional layers (kernel size=3×3, padding=1)
with ReLU activation, followed by 2 max-pooling layers and a fully connected layer (output size=4),
trained with cross-entropy loss and L2 regularization (𝜆=0.001);
Bi-LSTM Reservoir Parameter Prediction Model: 2-layer bidirectional LSTM (hidden size=256)
and 1-layer GRU, optimized with MSE loss and early stopping (patience=10);
KNN Fluid Identification Model: K=15, distance metric=weighted Euclidean distance, with
feature weights determined via grid search (GR=0.1, DEN=0.2, CNL=0.2, RT=0.3, RXO=0.1,
SP=0.1).
Large Model (Agent) Configuration
Base Model: Qianwen-32B (Alibaba Cloud) with 4-bit quantization for efficient inference;
RAG Knowledge Base: 1,000+ structured petrophysical rules and logging interpretation stan-
dards, organized into 8 categories (lithology identification, porosity calculation, fluid discrimina-
tion, etc.);
Prompt Engineering: Modular prompt template including role definition, task specification, and
output schema, designed to align with logging interpretation workflows.
S27

===== PAGE 55 =====

Supplementary Tables and Figures of Experiment Results
Table S5: Performance of LSTM Data Imputation Model on Test Set (Forward Simulation Dataset)
Logs MAE(±std) MSE(±std) Std𝑅 2(±std) Supporting Samples
AC 0.04638±0.0052 0.00431±6.8e-4 0.065 0.8992±0.012 2155
CNL 0.01628±0.0021 5.15e-4±8.5e-5 0.022 0.9896±0.003 318
RT 0.06657±0.0075 0.03977±4.2e-3 0.197 0.7906±0.018 221
Figure S8: Confusion Matrix of the Lithology Identification Model (Forward Simulation Dataset).
Comparative Experiments
Comparison with Traditional Manual Interpretation
We recruited three senior logging interpreters (with 2–10 years of experience) to complete
the same interpretation tasks using industry-standard commercial software (CIFLog2023). The
evaluation metrics included total interpretation time, parameter prediction accuracy (𝑅 2, MAE),
manual intervention frequency, and result consistency across interpreters.
S28

===== PAGE 56 =====

Figure S9: Confusion Matrix of the Fluid Identification Model (Forward Simulation Dataset).
According to Table S7, Auto-Logging cuts interpretation time from 14 hours to 25.3 min-
utes, boosting efficiency by about 97%. It delivers superior prediction accuracy (VSH𝑅 2 reaches
0.9959) with significantly lower MAE, requires only 1 minute of manual intervention (vs. 12
hours for traditional methods), and achieves much higher result consistency (ICC=0.99 vs. 0.75).
It thus eliminates reliance on expert subjective experience, enabling efficient, accurate, and stable
interpretation output.
Comparison with State-of-the-Art AI Methods
We selected four recent SOTA AI models for comparison, all focused on logging interpretation
tasks:
Transformer-Log: A Transformer-based model for multi-task reservoir parameter prediction.
GNN-Petrophysics: A graph neural network model leveraging spatial correlations between
logging curves.
CNN-LSTM Hybrid: A combined model for lithology classification and parameter prediction.
S29

===== PAGE 57 =====

Table S6: Reservoir Parameter Prediction Results (SPWLA Competition Dataset)
Parameter MAE(±std) MSE(±std) Std𝑅 2(±std)
PHIF 4.57e-3±6e-4 4.07e-5±5.2e-6 6.35e-3 0.9870±0.003
VSH 0.0206±0.002 9.23e-4±1.1e-4 0.0289 0.8196±0.012
SW 0.0296±0.003 5.49e-3±6.8e-4 0.0741 0.7439±0.015
Table S7: Comparison Between Auto-Logging and Traditional Manual Interpretation
Evaluation Metric Auto-Logging Traditional Method (CIFLog+Expert)
Total Interpretation Time 25.3±2.1 min 840±60 min (14 h)
POR𝑅 2 (±std) 0.9392±0.0087 0.85±0.025
VSH𝑅 2 (±std) 0.9959±0.0012 0.88±0.03
SW𝑅 2 (±std) 0.9477±0.0073 0.82±0.035
POR MAE (±std) 9.24e-3±1.5e-3 1.1e-2±1.8e-3
VSH MAE (±std) 9.98e-3±1.2e-3 0.025±0.003
SW MAE (±std) 0.0344±0.004 0.042±0.004
Manual Intervention Times 1±0.5 min 12±3 h
Result Consistency (ICC1) 0.99±0.003 0.75±0.04
MLP-Ensemble: An ensemble of multi-layer perceptrons optimized for logging data.
All models were retrained on the SPWLA dataset under the same hardware conditions (V100
GPU, 32GB RAM) to ensure fair comparison. The evaluation focused on single-task accuracy,
end-to-end automation, and multi-task coordination capability. The comparison results are shown
in Table S8.
Though slightly inferior to the Transformer model in single PHIF prediction, Auto-Logging
demonstrates balanced performance in comprehensive parameter prediction and lithology identifi-
cation. It is the only method supporting full end-to-end automation, with a much shorter end-to-end
time of 10.2 minutes (vs. 15.5–36.2 minutes for other SOTA models). It also features dynamic
multi-task coordination, addressing the limitation that existing AI models only automate individual
tasks and require manual scheduling.
S30

===== PAGE 58 =====

Ablation Experiments
To quantify the contribution of core components (RAG knowledge integration, LLM-based
dual-agent scheduling, and high-complexity LLM), we designed three ablation variants of Auto-
Logging:
Ablation 1 (No RAG): Planner relies solely on LLM’s general reasoning without retrieving
domain knowledge from the petrophysical knowledge base.
Ablation 2 (No LLM Scheduling): Fixed small model pipeline (manual task sequence, no
dynamic adjustment based on intermediate results).
Ablation 3 (Low-Complexity LLM): Replace Qianwen 32B with Qianwen 7B as the Plan-
ner/Executor.
All variants were tested on the forward simulation dataset, with evaluation metrics including
task decomposition accuracy, model scheduling success rate, end-to-end time, parameter prediction
𝑅2, and manual intervention times, and results are shown in Table S9.
LLM scheduling is the system’s core: its removal reduces task decomposition accuracy by 35%
and doubles processing time, validating the value of dynamic workflow adjustment. While slightly
extending time, RAG improves task compliance and prediction accuracy while reducing manual
intervention. Qianwen 7B performs comparably to Qianwen 32B and meets basic requirements,
but Qianwen 32B excels in complex reasoning and fine-grained performance, making it suitable for
high-demand scenarios.
S31

===== PAGE 59 =====

Table S8: Comparison Between Auto-Logging and SOTA AI Methods (SPWLA Dataset)
Model Transformer GNN CNN-LSTM Hybrid MLP-Ensemble Auto-Logging
PIHF𝑅 2 (±std) 0.9962±0.002 0.9251±0.016 0.9820±0.003 0.9789±0.006 0.9870±0.003
VSH𝑅 2 (±std) 0.8230±0.015 0.8021±0.025 0.7968±0.033 0.7752±0.053 0.8196±0.012
SW𝑅 2 (±std) 0.7254±0.013 0.7578±0.009 0.7474±0.013 0.7020±0.022 0.7439±0.015
Lithology Acc. (±std) - - 0.9025±0.013 0.9362±0.029 0.9158±0.018
End-to-End Time 23.6±5.4 min 36.2±8.6 min 20.8±3.3 min 15.5±9 min 10.2±1.3 min
Automation Level Partial (single-task) Partial (single-task) Partial(single-task) Partial (single-task) Full (end-to-end)
Multi-Task Coordination No No No No Yes (dynamic)
S32

===== PAGE 60 =====

Table S9: Ablation Experiment Results)
Model Variant Task
Decomposition
Acc. (±std)
Scheduling
Success Rate
(±std)
End-to-End Time
(±std)
Avg.𝑅 2 (±std) Manual Interven-
tion Times (±std)
Auto-Logging (Full Model) 100%±0% 98%±1.2% 25.3±2.1 min 0.96±0.008 1±0.5 min
Ablation 1 (No RAG) 92%±3% 90%±2.3% 20.3±2.2 min 0.92±0.015 2±1 min
Ablation 2 (No LLM
Scheduling)
65%±4% 75%±3.1% 45.2±3.8 min 0.89±0.02 3±1.5 min
Ablation 3 (Qianwen 7B) 96%±2.5% 95%±1.8% 25.5±2.3 min 0.94±0.012 1±0.8 min
S33